## Exploratory Data Analysis {.page_break_before}

To further understand our dataset (the concrete mixture components) and the role of each parameter on the compressive strength of concrete, and the different relationships between the different parameters themselves, a comprehensive exploratory analysis will be performed in this section. 

### Summary Statistics

This section illustrates the general statistics of the dataset to show simple trends between the different parameters.

|                   variable |    mean |     std |     min |     q25 |  median |      q75 |      max |
|----------------------------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|----------|----------|
|             Cement (kg/m3) | 281.168 | 104.506 | 102.000 | 192.375 | 272.900 |  350.000 |  540.000 |
|              Water (kg/m3) | 181.567 |  21.354 | 121.800 | 164.900 | 185.000 |  192.000 |  247.000 |
|   Coarse Aggregate (kg/m3) | 972.919 |  77.754 | 801.000 | 932.000 | 968.000 | 1029.400 | 1145.000 |
|     Fine Aggregate (kg/m3) | 773.580 |  80.176 | 594.000 | 730.950 | 779.500 |  824.000 |  992.600 |
| Blast Furnace Slag (kg/m3) |  73.896 |  86.279 |   0.000 |   0.000 |  22.000 |  142.950 |  359.400 |
|            Fly Ash (kg/m3) |  54.188 |  63.997 |   0.000 |   0.000 |   0.000 |  118.300 |  200.100 |
|   Superplasticizer (kg/m3) |   6.205 |   5.974 |   0.000 |   0.000 |   6.400 |   10.200 |   32.200 |
|                  Age (day) |  45.662 |  63.170 |   1.000 |   7.000 |  28.000 |   56.000 |  365.000 |
| Compressive strength (MPa) |  35.818 |  16.706 |   2.330 |  23.710 |  34.445 |   46.135 |   82.600 | 

Table: Summary Statistics
{#tbl:summarytable}

![
Violin, Box, and Dot Plots of Dataset. (1) Mass Axis (2) Days Axis (3) Strength Axis
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uiceds/cee-492-term-project-fall-2022-team-online/main/reference/Ray/BoxViolinDot.png "BoxViolinDot"){#fig:summaryfig width="500px"}

Table @tbl:summarytable shows the mean, standard deviation, minimum & maximum, first quartile, median, and third quartile. Figure @fig:summaryfig shows a visual form of Table @tbl:summarytable.

The main components, cement, water, and aggregates are present in all concrete mixes. The aggregates make a major portion of the concrete mix. The portion of water in the observations do not vary as much as the other main components. 

| With Blast Furnace Slag | With Fly Ash | With Superplasticizer | Observations |
|-------------------------|--------------|-----------------------|--------------|
|                   false |        false |                 false |          209 |
|                   false |        false |                  true |           23 |
|                   false |         true |                 false |            6 |
|                   false |         true |                  true |          233 |
|                    true |        false |                 false |          164 |
|                    true |        false |                  true |          170 |
|                    true |         true |                  true |          225 |

Table: Secondary Component Observation Count
{#tbl:seccompobstable}

Blast furnace slag, fly ash, and super plasticizer are not present in all observations. Table @tbl:seccompobstable shows that there are 209 observations without secondary components. Out of the secondary components, superplasticizer is the most prevalent with 651 total observations. However, superplasticizer has the least average mass in the concrete mix. There are no observations with both blast furnace slag and fly ash. 

The median age of concrete strength measurement is at 28 days. Typical concrete testing in the industry is made on the 28<sup>th</sup> day. Some observations were measured after a year from casting. 

The mean age of concrete strength for the dataset is 35.8 MPa. The minimum and maximum concrete strength observed are 2.3 MPa and 82.6 MPa, respectively.
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

### Correlation
In this section, the general correlations between various variables have been examined. The purpose is to understand the how each variable affects each other and as well as to understand how each variable affects the compressive strength of concrete. 

![
Correlation plot of Water, Superplasticizer & Compressive Strength 
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uiceds/cee-492-term-project-fall-2022-team-online/main/reference/Min Win/plot_1to3.png "Plot_1to3"){#fig:Plot_1to3 width="500px"}

|                            | Cement (kg/m3) | Blast Furnace Slag (kg/m3) | Fly Ash (kg/m3) | Compressive strength (MPa) |
|----------------------------|----------------|----------------------------|-----------------|----------------------------|
|             Cement (kg/m3) |           1.00 |                      -0.28 |           -0.40 |                       0.50 |
| Blast Furnace Slag (kg/m3) |          -0.28 |                       1.00 |           -0.32 |                       0.13 |
|            Fly Ash (kg/m3) |          -0.40 |                      -0.32 |            1.00 |                      -0.11 |
| Compressive strength (MPa) |           0.50 |                       0.13 |           -0.11 |                       1.00 |
Table: Correlation table of Cement, Blast Furnace Slag, Fly Ash, Compressive Strength
{#tbl:corr13}

From Figure @fig:Plot_1to3 and Table @tbl:corr13, is can be seen that apart from the positive correlation of compressive strength to cement, most other correlations have a neutral to negative correlation.  

For the comparison of Compressive Strength against Cement, it is seen to have a moderate positive correlation of 0.50.  This tells us that as cement content increases, the compressive strength of concrete also increases. 

For Compressive Strength against Blast Furnace Slag and Fly Ash, which are commonly used as fillers for cement, it can be seen that they have a very weak correlation of 0.13 and -0.11. As such, it can be taken that Blast Furnace Slag and Fly Ash does not affect Compressive Strength when used as fillers for Cement. 

For the correlation plots comparing Fly Ash against Cement, Fly Ash against Blast Furnace Slag, and Blast Furnace Slag against Cement, it can be seen that they have a weak correlation of -0.40, -0.32, -0.28. The negative correlations corelease with existing domain knowledge that Blast Furnace Slag and Fly Ash are substitutes of Cement. As when either the content of Blast Furnace Slag or Fly Ash goes up, the Cement content goes down.  

From the histogram plots, it can be seen that Blast Furnace Slag and Fly Ash there is a high count of zero, showing that not all concrete mix designs require them. As such, it might be important to take into consideration the effects of the large amounts of zeros during preliminary modelling.  


![
Correlation plot of water , superplasticizer and compressive strength
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uiceds/cee-492-term-project-fall-2022-team-online/main/reference/Pim/plot_4to5.png "plot_4to5-2"){#fig:plot4to5 width="500px"}


|                            | Water (kg/m3) | Superplasticizer (kg/m3) | Compressive strength (MPa) |
|----------------------------|---------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|
|              Water (kg/m3) |          1.00 |                    -0.66 |                      -0.29 |
|   Superplasticizer (kg/m3) |         -0.66 |                     1.00 |                       0.37 |
| Compressive strength (MPa) |         -0.29 |                     0.37 |                       1.00 |

Table: Correlation coefficients of water , superplasticizer and compressive strength
{#tbl:corr4to5}

From Table @tbl:corr4to5, we see a weak positive correlation of 0.36 between the amount of superplasticizer in the mix and compressive strength. Table @tbl:corr4to5 also shows a weak negative correlation of -0.29 between Water content and compressive strength. 
As expected, the more water we have in the mix, the weaker the concrete and the more superplasticizer we have, the stronger the concrete. We can also observe that Water content and superplasticizer amount have a strong negative correlation of -0.65. Overall the more superplasticizer we have, the less water there is in these concrete mixes. 

![
Correlation plot of Fine Aggregates , Coarse Aggregates and compressive strength
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uiceds/cee-492-term-project-fall-2022-team-online/main/reference/Pim/plot_6to7.png "plot_6to7"){#fig:plot6to7 width="500px"}

|                            | Coarse Aggregate (kg/m3) | Fine Aggregate (kg/m3) | Compressive strength (MPa) |
|----------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------|----------------------------|
|   Coarse Aggregate (kg/m3) |                     1.00 |                  -0.66 |                      -0.29 |
|     Fine Aggregate (kg/m3) |                    -0.66 |                   1.00 |                       0.37 |
| Compressive strength (MPa) |                    -0.29 |                   0.37 |                       1.00 |

Table: Correlation coefficients of water , superplasticizer and compressive strength
{#tbl:corr6to7}

In Table @tbl:corr6to7, we can see the correlations between fine aggregates, coarse aggregates and compressive strength.  We have a weak negative correlation of   -0.16 between Fine aggregates and compressive strength and a weak negative correlation coefficient of -0.16 between coarse aggregates and compressive strength. We might gain more insight by taking these two elements together and comparing them to the compressive strength.  

These correlations are in line with what is expected for a concrete mix. However, to further understand our dataset, more in-depth correlations using combinations of different components are investigated. 

### Specific Correlation

In this section, the specific interactions between variables will be further discussed.

![
Correlation plot of Water/cement ratio against the concrete compressive strength
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uiceds/cee-492-term-project-fall-2022-team-online/main/reference/Dafar/plot_5.png "Plot_5"){#fig:wTOcfig1 width="500px"}

Figure @fig:wTOcfig1 shows the relationship between the water to cement ratio (w/c) and concrete compressive strength. This ratio is considered the most significant influence on the final compressive strength of the concrete mixture. As we can see from Figure @fig:wTOcfig1, the strength of concrete increases as the w/c decreases.  The reason for that is as the amount of water increases in the mixture (for a specific amount of cement), the distance between the cement particles increases which leads to a more diluted and weaker paste. In practice, the w/c ranges from about 0.3 to over 0.8, which is the range where have the largest number of data as seen in the histogram in Figure @fig:wTOcfig1. It is noticeable that there are significant amount of scatter in this relationship which can be attributed to two main reasons. First, this figure includes all the available concrete compressive strength data that have been measured at different concrete ages. The second, there are other factors that play a role in the final concrete compressive strength like the amount of fine and coarse aggregates, and these factors are not filtered within the data used to plot this figure.   

![
Correlation plot of Water/cement ratio against the concrete compressive strength at 28 days
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uiceds/cee-492-term-project-fall-2022-team-online/main/reference/Dafar/plot_5b.png "Plot_5b"){#fig:wTOcfig2 width="500px"}

To see how better the relationship can be, the factor of the concrete age was eliminated. In Figure @fig:wTOcfig2, we are plotting the same relationship as in Figure @fig:wTOcfig1 but just using the concrete compressive strength data at 28 days. It is clear that the scatter has been reduced and the effect of the w/c became more apparent.  

The same trend can also be observed in the work that has been done by US Bureau of Reclamation (1975) as shown in Figure @fig:wTOcfig3 below.  

![
Compressive strength versus w/c (US Bureau of Reclamation, 1975)
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uiceds/cee-492-term-project-fall-2022-team-online/main/reference/Ray/WCPlotRef.png  "WCPlotRef"){#fig:wTOcfig3 width="500px"}

![
Average compressive strength versus age of observations without secondary components
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uiceds/cee-492-term-project-fall-2022-team-online/main/reference/Ray/CAPlot.png  "CAPlot"){#fig:wTOcfig4 width="500px"}

Figure @fig:wTOcfig4 shows averaged compressive strength from observations with the same primary components and more than five instances of measurement in time. 

![
Compressive strength versus age (Merrit, 1983)
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uiceds/cee-492-term-project-fall-2022-team-online/main/reference/Ray/CAPlotRef.png   "CAPlotRef"){#fig:wTOcfig5 width="500px"}

In addition to the w/c, the compressive strength against age can also be referenced to established standards. Figure @fig:wTOcfig5 shows that concrete compressive strength increases significantly in the first four weeks from casting and increases gradually thereafter. The same trend illustrated in Figure @fig:wTOcfig4 can be seen in Figure @fig:wTOcfig5. 

All these observations gathered from the general trends and the in-depth relationships will be used to improve our different models, by utilizing techniques like feature selection, that we will discuss in the following sections. 